Back to the Open Web Alliance Dev Room at FuzzDem 2024.
Now I have the great pleasure of introducing a Type 03 friend, Daniel Homer-Adan, who runs
the Type 03 Community Expansion Committee, which makes it part of his actual job to go
around the world helping people with open source software.
And he's got some really cool stories to tell today.
Please, one more time.
Thank you very much.
Actually the organizers of the agenda were inspired to put me after Owen, because I will
follow on the idea of building up the narrative.
You know, Owen was mentioning that he would very much like to also get a call from Burkina
Faso or another country to go there.
While we somehow did get that call from Rwanda, as Matias was saying, the matter from then
on was for us to create the frame into which we can actually receive calls from all over
the place.
And we are actually doing it and it's a matter, I think, of positioning and of building up
this ability of ours to transform our capacity into value.
Value, which is not necessarily something that we need to have a lot of money.
We didn't have a lot of money when we started.
We don't have a lot of money now, but we believe that it's a matter of value.
So the value in which we believe and the value in which we create.
I'm going to talk about the strategic approach, which while was developed by our
Type 3 community, is actually, I really believe that actually working very well for any open
source community.
And definitely for any of the technologies and communities which are forming the open
website alliance here.
So I'm not going to delve into the technical parts of the Type 3 CMS technology itself,
but go into the principles of what we've done and what we're planning to do.
I'm Daniel from Oroden.
I'm coordinating the community expansion committee in the Type 3 association.
So it's a very important working because here we're talking about the expansion of the
community.
What does it mean?
It was the committee was created in 2018 in order to take care of bringing the community
and our technology in countries where Type 3 was not yet known.
So Type 3, maybe you know it, was developed in the central Europe and most of the market
was and still is into the German speaking countries and the countries around it.
We've started to go into other geographies, into Africa, Latin America and so on.
And while we are doing this, the committee itself actually is concentrating on several types
of activities.
It's engaging communities of web developers, looking to support them to understand and
to learn the Type 3 technology and is also working with the market, say potential clients
of various kinds and that was the initial idea.
We have run for several years a program which was called the International Type 3 Mentorship
Program.
What it means is that through volunteer mentors or technical mentors from the Type 3 association
community, we are supporting people who wanted to learn Type 3 from countries like Botswana,
Zimbabwe, Rwanda, Uganda, Cuba, Chile, Bosnia and so on, keeping in mind that these are
countries where Type 3 was not yet known or not yet embraced.
Yet we really found out that through running these type of programs, while the people there
got the basics of the Type 3 technology, there was still something very important which was
missing, which was the access to work, the actual ability of them to earn their living
using Type 3 and that was something that we realized we have to fix and that changed a
lot of things.
So we are now moving towards our approach into going from technology first towards market
first or towards client first.
I'm going to talk about the way into which this story evolved from the Rwandan story and
our engagement with the Rwandan government, then the development of some principles which
we are following and which we have developed into a strategy that is now going to be embraced
by various other countries.
In Africa but also beyond, we had the chance, the chance that we actually made ourselves
to travel around the world.
So last year, for example, we've reached physically governments far away from Oceania, for example,
from Papua New Guinea and many, many governments from Africa as well.
So how did Rwanda story came to being?
Rwanda is a relatively small country in the middle of Africa.
It has 12 million people and throughout the recent time, it has positioned itself as the
digitalization line or the digital transformation line of Africa.
Or some people say the Singapore of Africa.
It's not just in relation to digitalization but in relation to the entire economical development
that happened in the past, let's say, 10, 15 years.
And due to a very, very strong, very coherent political alignment and political will, it
managed to make strides into this logic of development.
So it's not somehow necessarily a surprise, the fact that Rwanda, with some support from us, as you will see,
has managed to establish itself as the first country which has set up an open source community-based
content management system as a national standard for all the websites of all the public institutions
in the country, starting from government, to national agencies, to regional administration, to embassies, everything.
So this type of model actually is now going to be taken over by other governments and I'll get to that.
In 2018, the websites of the government of Rwanda were running on a very old, even though type of tree,
it was a very old version of it. It was easy for us to connect with them because of that.
But actually, as Matias was mentioning about the call about upgrading the websites, those websites which were old and abandoned
were not upgradable per se and they were not upgraded.
Actually, when we first engaged, we saw the state of lack of maintenance, both in the terms of technology,
but also in the terms of content, the fact that many were running without HTTPS, that each was running on a different server,
that some didn't have editors at all, and a lot of many other problems. Some were crashing constantly.
We realized that the problem is not just about upgrading some websites.
So we've started by asking questions which at that point were hard questions.
Now for us, they are normal. They are part of, let's say, receipt of approach, saying that aside from your perceived need of having the websites upgrade,
do you actually have the knowledge in the country? Do you have the knowledge in the government to manage this type of projects?
Do you have the knowledge in the market to develop this type of projects?
Do you have the methodologies to host them, to deploy them, to monitor them, to ensure their security, to ensure their performance,
to tune them? Do you have the capacity to actually train the editors in all the public institutions, ministries, city halls and so on,
who can really maintain the websites? And when the answers definitely at that point were no, then we said it's not about the technology,
it's about the process. So first of all and foremost, we need to have a plan.
You have to have a plan as a government to develop this coherent approach of your new project, which of course it was typo 3,
but it was not about the technology itself, it was about the approach at the national level to build up the capacity and to build up a plan on the long run.
Two years and it took us four trips until we actually together with the government of Rwanda managed to set up a plan,
a plan of what we need to do, of what they need to do and how we need to approach the process.
They've managed to receive funding from the German cooperation agency, GIZ, in order to support them to actually train people,
both in the government and in the private sector, and to deploy and set up the capacity there.
At that point, and you see some of the pictures of these workshops that we did, on one hand to present, well the technology, the typo 3,
but also to work together with them on the plan itself, so how the training or the knowledge acquisition has to be done and so on.
And after the initial plan was set, a coaching phase began, a coaching phase which initially the government and the sponsor was thinking that it's about typo 3 technology.
While it was about typo 3 technology, I would say that a lot of the activity was given to other type of aspects which for any developing country are super important.
We might not see or might not perceive directly that a lot of support and a lot of knowledge gaining has to be taken in the methodology.
So in the way that you're coding, in the way that you're organizing, in the tools that you're using, think that in many countries in the world,
they did not benefit of university degrees or university level as we have in Europe.
Maybe the ways into which they've approached coding so far was not structured, was not organized.
They didn't know how to use properly the ideas.
They didn't know how to use a management, a task management tracker.
The methodology, for example, so Edge Island Scrum methodology, for example, was known as principle for them, but not as a practice.
And one important aspect, the deployment.
So continuous integration, continuous deployment, that was something that we've put a lot of emphasis on in order to build a proper methodology which has to be described, has to be understood, and then followed.
Before and after the coaching is ending.
So a CICD pipeline which would prevent by design, the local developers to, for example, go and directly change something in the production website, things which was a common thing.
I mean, it was the way that they were doing it before we actually started to work with them in that direction.
And the level of the instability of the website before we've done this support for transformation was quite terrible.
So throughout the phase of six months of support through coaching, we've managed to transfer knowledge and to develop these good practices.
So they have developed the central governmental website and six, first six ministerial websites.
After that, the coaching from us, let's say, and the support from the donor has diminished or has finished, and they continued through their own resources to launch further on websites.
So never at any moment did we, the traditional Type 3 community members, write any line of code in those websites.
Everything, everything, front-end, back-end configurations, everything was done by them, by the Rwandans.
Well, without coaching, but really it was a supportive coaching and not something intrusive that we did because the important thing was for them to develop their capacity.
Up until this moment, more than 300 websites were launching Rwanda on Type 3.
So from the central government, national agencies, regional and local administration embassies, they have set up at the level of the national IT agency,
a center for training of the editors, meaning that all the editors from all the ministries and institutions are going through a formalized, standardized training and a national support center,
both functional and technical at the level of the national institution.
So that means that the other institutions did not have any more the burden of having to maintain and to know their own website while everything was taken care in a standardized approach.
In what I will go a bit further, a centralized deployment and hosting approach as well.
So in the national data center, in one place, everything was set up, supported by a team of DevOps and cybersecurity engineers, which also we have supported coaching, let's say.
In this respect of doing the audits, both for performance and both for cybersecurity, for security, and doing a disaster recovery policy, which by the way, before we came in, was not present.
So all the websites of the government agencies and so on are actually following the same pattern, the same look and feel and the same content structure.
You see here, for example, the main website of the government, let's say the Gov website.
You see here an example of a ministerial website of the Ministry of ICT.
So it follows the same logic, the same pattern, the same type of content blocks in order to create a familiarity for the users, the visitors of the website with the ways that the institutions in the country are presenting themselves.
Here is a website of a region, a northern region.
And what we have right now is more than 300 websites, 19 ministries which are all on one code instance, 30 districts on one code instance, and the logic continues.
What does it mean on one code instance?
Well, for this instance, actually there is one installation, a multi-tenant or multi-domain, which provides the code for all the websites of the same type.
Why is that?
Because actually the functional and technical resembles allow it to use the same technological components and extensions in the case of Type 3.
While in the same time, the technical architecture of Type 3 allows completely autonomous management from the back end of all the websites, each of the websites.
Each of the websites has the editor structure with their rights and access abilities with their own content and of course with their own layouts or layout specific elements, let's say.
What we got out of it and what they got out of it is an approach into which they have a standardized take or standardized framework both in the technical perspective,
but also in the perspective of doing the development further, doing the maintenance, the disaster recovery, the training of the editors, the support functional and technical,
the continuous integration, continuous deployment and monitoring and auditing both performance and security.
All being done under the umbrella of the National IT Agency.
In this coaching program of six months, there was a relatively equal representation of engineers from the National Agency and developers from local private companies.
And the local private companies further on have carried on the development of the next websites and the process is still carried on.
Of course, we are expecting on a target of general of about 600 websites.
Now, out of this experience and out of the success that we saw, not just in the matter of technology, but in the entire approach and the effect that we saw in the country,
both in them having well established stable websites and also capacity both in the government and private sector and opportunity at the private sector,
we realized that we can actually extend this, learn the points towards any government in the world.
Any government in the world.
And we're not just talking about the African ones.
We're talking about the European ones as well and the most developed countries as well.
And the principal, as you will see, are transversal are at the highest level, not necessarily touching the technology per se,
although the technology has to be adequate in order to support the principles.
So what the principles are?
Of course, the websites have to be secure.
Be on recognized, secure the frameworks.
They have to be standardized and what we mean by standardization is the effect or the scale effect that is generated both in terms of economy,
economy of scale, definitely when you're doing this approach you have much less costs than the traditional approach of actually each institution
choosing their own technology and then running their own tender and hiring their own developers in order to do their own website,
which afterwards get not maintained because the SLA contracts with the developers and or the technology gets obsolete
and nobody is tracking it on the long run.
So building a logic of standardization at the level of technology and also at the level of the method creates a tremendous effect direct economic in the cost of developing and running the websites.
When you're applying proper methodologies for all the processes like security and performance and everything,
you're actually getting a much higher, much better resilience and again and a much better cost because everything is at the level of the hosting strategy centralized in all in one place.
Nowadays when we're talking with other countries about the standardization we're actually bringing to the discussion 12 points and I've actually pointed them out into this talk up until now,
but we are in the moment into which definitely the next country which will adopt it with the support of international funders is already Somalia.
There are several other countries which are in advanced state of discussions, Senegal, Gambia, Papua New Guinea.
All understanding as of now the idea and the logic of having a structured approach.
So it's not about let's do a website and then we'll see what we'll do next.
It's about first making a plan, choosing what's right, building your capacity in terms of management and the development and touch all the points.
From development to maintenance to upgrade updates, patching, integration, deployment, performance, security, disaster recovery, definitely technical support,
technical project manager level of the authority of the country which is responsible or authorities if it is the case.
Content migration if it is the case, sometimes it is, definitely from the older websites to the new one and the training and the boarding of editors.
And what we're doing and we're very careful about and also to advise governments is that we need to establish from the start a proper method of onboarding and aligning all the institutions.
It would be bad and very, very damaging for them.
If one, let's say one minister out of 20 would say no we don't follow this thing because we have our own people, we know best and so on.
It breaks all the logic of sustainability and that's the first thing that we're actually doing.
So you see there are many, many layers aside from technology per se that needs to be taken care of.
So right now one of the most important aspects into which we're dwelling initially in the initial discussions with governments is, okay, who is pro, who's against in your country for this type of model.
If there are agencies, their directors and so on which are having a different opinion, they say, okay, how can we actually smoothen up the process so they can actually embrace this approach.
So in the interest of time and because the most important point will be what we're doing next and what we're going to do next together.
I will go, let's say faster through some websites related to the principles of the websites of the governments.
But one point to make here is that it all relates to strategy and to the discourse that we have.
So as I've mentioned earlier, it's about the value that we are creating and we realize that the value that we are creating is much more than the technological value.
And the thing is that we are only showing what the value should be or could be and it's them, it's the local capacity, local institutions which are actually creating it.
But to point out that several principles have to be followed.
And when we are looking at these principles, the principles that you see on the screen are actually applying to any system, any digital asset of any government in the world or any institution in the world.
And each of them should follow them and should prioritize them and then it should choose the methodology, the vendors, the technology in order to fulfill them.
So this is the type of narrative that also to follow up on the OAN's presentation, we need to push in order to break from the vendors pressure of the technologies which have much higher budgets that we have.
So it's not about only the technological effect, it's a lot to do about the social effect.
And this is how we realize while not starting in 2018 with this idea but actually catching up with what we've managed to create, that a lot of what we are doing and a lot of what we will do is about the systemic societal effect.
It's about empowering the local businesses, the local people to not only learn but to use that learning in order to access new jobs, to access new opportunities, to develop a capacity and an understanding to partner with each other and to support each other in order to be more competitive, both in their country and outside.
And this is the first lesson that we realize that we've managed to do in Rwanda and this is the lesson that we want to push and we push in front of each government in that.
And to all these very important points, the open source as a principle responds very well in terms of the digital sovereignty control over your systems, your data, independence from vendors, optimal life cycle costs, technical flexibility, stronger local business, new high value jobs for the local people.
That is something that us as communities, as international communities around open source technologies should strive for to support.
Although one point to make and the following remarks actually apply positively to all the members of our open websites alliance is that not all the open source projects are created alike.
And we see a lot of discussion and backlash from the governments which are not understanding properly what kind of open source they should use and how they should prepare to use it.
That they shown on or put a blame on the idea of open source itself as being a risky technology in principle.
The right open source is an open source which is properly supported, maintained, developed with a continuous long term vision and approach and with a clear long term evolution path.
That is super important and of course it has to have community or let's say availability of developers and companies that can support development of new projects in order to alleviate the risk for the vendor lock-in.
What we have right now and what we are already using in different circumstances with various governments in the world is to put up their set of principles on to which they can easily already develop their strategy and their plan.
And we are seeing by working with them right now how easy it became when everything is set up and everything makes sense, makes sense for them and makes sense on the long run.
Standardization and planning is a definite need.
Optimal technological architecture so that is not we are doing a website and then we'll see. That's not the way and we really and we have learned to be bold also when we are asked by a government to say let's do an experiment.
No, it doesn't work.
So experiments doesn't work, strategies do.
You know you're creating ownership, you're creating the understanding, you're creating a commitment for a long term and then things might work.
Right?
So optimal technical architecture to hold complex installations, to hold multi-tenant deployments.
That's a must.
Strategies to support all the processes, not only the development itself, but everything that is related to it, to development and maintenance and so on.
Don't keep the burden in the government.
Share it with the private sector.
Ultimately is the private sector is the startups is the freelancer is the developers that will be your partner as a government all over the place in all the world to build up to support to maintain the websites and in general.
The application thinking the terms of life cycle things do change up websites as any other application needs to be upgraded.
It needs to be changed needs to be re-implemented at some point for sure needs to be integrated needs to be extended and so on.
You need to think at that all the time.
And one important thing which we believe that already in Europe we have a bit of tradition in other places and for sure in Africa there is no such tradition is technical community.
Technical local community that share an interest in the technology that shared understanding that supporting each other and working together makes sense for them and that are also having a mechanism of governance.
Meaning that several or some people or at least somebody is able to bring the people together to foster this development of conversation and to support the discussion to move on.
Out of this.
Initial project and then the discussions that we had more and more with governments and with global.
Global funding organizations.
We found ourselves as matching with the logic and the strategy of a very important international project which is called golf.
Govsteck or govsteck global.
Probably some of you have heard about it.
It was initiated by the International Telecommunion and German cooperation agency.
And what it looks for is to develop specifications on essential areas of digital transformation of a country or of a government and to support that government with blueprint sandbox rules requirements and recommendation in order for them to be ready and to implement faster.
Those type of.
Of systems.
So these building blocks are developed with the support of.
People from various types of communities.
Volunteers as well as personnel from it.
And the least while it has started and you see already 12 building blocks which already reached a certain level of maturity.
I would say most of them are quite mature already.
And the least will expand.
So you see for example we have a building block for identity which is the national system.
Building blocks for.
Gis for geographic information systems for all the country for signatures for workflows which is the support for the digital transformation or even automation of processes in between the institution or with the citizen and so on.
And each of the building blocks has a certain structure.
Of course with some aspects related to.
Requirements other recommendations.
Strategies for implementation.
And so on.
I won't go into details here but.
The specifications of the building blocks which are already developed or let's say.
Documented are present on the website of Gov stack.
You can find them.
It's they are organized in by using the book.
They can be brought by anybody.
What will happen very soon is an announcement of a new building block.
The content management system building block which is aiming to become a specification.
Including recommendations requirements.
And support for the implementation of a national strategies for the websites of governments all over the world.
Once this specification is actually developed.
The big funders.
I.T.U. and J.S.A. will support its implementation and will support actually the governments to pick it up and to use it.
One important aspect here.
Is that this specification is not strictly technology related.
So while due to our activity our record and our relations with the donors.
We will.
Move do the first move.
In order to support I.T.U. and the NG is that to set up this.
Building block.
Actually the team which will develop the specification hopefully.
Some of them are here in this room and it's not about only the people from the type three community.
It's about the people from Drupal from jumlah from WordPress and definitely from from other content management systems that.
That are aligning with the principles that that we are discussing together in the.
Open websites alliance.
What we are looking to do together is to develop a set of.
Specifications which actually touch those these points.
So high level strategic requirements functional requirements technical requirements.
Data structure, integrity and interoperability in terms of principles.
So how things should work and we are not going to say okay Drupal is doing this type of trees doing that it is beyond the scope now of this specification.
The specification needs to create the concept which needs to be followed or should be followed by any of the governments.
So what we're looking for is to actually develop this team to set it up to work together with I.T.U. and the JZ to to formalize the building block working group.
And then to create a set of.
Of rules that would allow us to collaborate and of course to come with.
A specification that we can then use in relation to all the governments very soon so thank you very much if there is time for question I don't know what Jim can tell me.
Yes, couple questions.
Anybody anybody please.
Hi, thank you so much.
I've been working in digital conservation for quite some time.
And it tends to be driven by vendors vendors who buy the thing and all your problems themselves.
And we've been saying for a very long time that the most important is to have a plan.
So that's what you're doing.
My question is what were the factors that enabled you to actually go in and say what we need to plan and this is going to make it work.
What allowed to be the second environment to need for a strategic plan?
All right, I will repeat the question for the audience online.
How could we make a difference in putting strategy and planning first while the general approach is vendor driven projects?
Well, the aspect was our principle.
We are very, very adamant on respecting the logic of the flow.
So we have the possibility to not agree with any government or with any donor because we are not linked to any contract.
So we just say what we believe in and we did it.
That's why we went four times in Rwanda because the first time it was not convincing enough.
The second was not convincing enough.
The fourth was, you know, but we said on the same thing and as one of our colleagues and supporters is saying, keep on saying the thing that makes sense until it will be understood.
And that is what we're doing.
So we have received recently the same point from another government.
Let's do a website first and then we'll see.
And no, we just don't do that until you're committed to do a proper plan.
We're not we're not engaging.
Very good question.
Anyone else?
Wonderful.
Okay.
Thank you, Daniel.
Thank you so much.
Thank you.